---
layout:     post
title:      macOS Basic Usages
subtitle:   macOS Basic Usages
date:       2022-01-26
author:     Rain Chen
catalog: true
tags:
    - Mac
---

Contents
- unordered list
{:toc}

# macOS Basic Usages

## 0. Introduction to macOS

Obviously, an operating system for Apple Mac computers.

## 1. Restore Launchpad and Dock

### 1.1 Restore Launchpad

First, type the following command in Terminal.

```shell
rm ~/Library/Application\ Support/Dock/*.db && killall Dock
```

Then, use this command to restore icons.

```shell
defaults write com.apple.dock ResetLaunchPad -bool true && killall Dock
```

After doing the above steps, all the Apps made by Apple will be put into the first screen.

### 1.2 Restore Dock

First, type the following in Terminal.

```shell
defaults delete com.apple.dock
```

Then, use the following command to restart the Dock.

```shell
killall Dock
```

All is done.

## 2. Install Softwares

### 2.1 macOS Software Packages

Generally, macOS software packages are with names end with `.app`, which make them look like files. Actually, an App package is a folder named with `AppName.app`, containing all the components for the program. If you want to see the contents, just secondary click the App icon, choose `Show Package Contents` option. Remember that double click the icon will only open and run the software.

### 2.2 Install an App

#### 2.2.1 Install an App from App Store

1. Open App Store, login with your Apple ID
2. Search your App on the left.
3. Or you can choose the classified gallery.
4. Or have a glance at the Discovery pages.

#### 2.2.2 Get an PKG File?

Use Installer to install the app if you have a `xxx.pkg` file.

1. Double click to open it.
2. Follow the tips to install.

#### 2.2.3 Get a DMG File?

Drag and drop. If you have a `xxx.dmg` file, just open it.

1. Drag the `xxx.app` icon to the `Applications` folder.
2. Close the window and eject the image.

#### 2.2.4 Get an Install.app?

Some DMG files only contain an `xxxInstaller.app` package. Just run it and follow the steps.

Some large softwares may use this installing methods.

Eject the image after the installation is done.

#### 2.2.5 Get a ZIP File?

Use a archiver to extract the file. Generally you will get a `xxx.app` package.

Move the package into `Applications` folder.

### 2.3 Want to use pirate Apps?

No, you don't want to.

## 3. Recommended Apps

### 3.1 Utilities

#### VLC media player

A cross-platform media player. Free and open-source.

Portal: <https://www.videolan.org>

#### Keka

A free achiever with no ads.

Portal: <https://www.keka.io>

#### Motrix

A Bittorrent downloading client. Free and open-source.

Portal: <https://www.motrix.app>

#### Downie

Video downloading. Not free.

### 3.2 Developing Tools

#### iTerm

macOS Terminal. Many functions.

#### Clash

A proxy tool.

#### Visual Studio Code

Editing envolved.

#### UTM

Virtual machines. Support Apple Silicon.

### 3.3 Creative Apps

#### Blender

Open-source 3D and editing app.

#### Aegisub

Subtitle editing app.


