---
layout: post
title: Explainable AI - Notes and Practice
date: 2025-10-17
author: Rain
tags:
  - CityU
  - Artificial Intelligence
  - XAI
---

# Explainable AI - Notes and Practice

## Linear Regression and Logistic Regression

We make regression because we want to make a "supervise learning", that is, input observation $\mathbf{x}$ which is
typically a vector in $\mathbb{R}^d$ and output a $y \in \mathbb{R}$ which is a real number. Our goal is to predict the
output $y$ from input $\mathbf{x}$. That is, learn the function:

$$
y = f(\mathbf{x}) + \epsilon
$$

where $\epsilon$ is the noise.

Then we come to the linear regression.

### Linear Regression

Given a linear function of the input feature $x$, $f(x) = \omega * x + b$, where $\omega$ is the slope and $b$ is the
intercept. Then we observe a noisy output of the function, then $f(x) = \omega * x + b + \epsilon$ where $\epsilon$ is a
assumed Gaussian noise.

We make it to the d-dimension case. The linear combination (also called weighted sum) of $d$ input
variables $x_1, ..., x_d$. Now we have:

$$
f(x) = \omega_0 + \omega_1 x_1 + \omega_2 x_2 + ... + \omega_d x_d
$$

where $x_j$ is the input features, $\omega_j$ is the input feature weights and $\omega_0$ is the intercept.

The **KEY ASSUMPTIONS** of Linear Regression:

- **Linearity**: Prediction is a linear combination of features. (Obviously, linear effects are easily interpretable;
  and additivity seperates the effects.)
- **Normality**: Errors are normally distributed.
- **Homoscedasticity**: Constant variance of errors across feature space.
- **Independence**: Each instance is independent. (We do not measure a same thing repeatly.)
- **Fixed Features**: Features are treated as constants, free of measurement error.
- **No Multicollinearity**: Features should not be strongly correlated.

### Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)

Suppose we have a linear function:

$$
f(\mathbf{x}) = \mathbf{w}^T \mathbf{x} + b
$$

need to estimate the parameter $(\mathbf{w}, b)$ from the data. A method is to fit the parameters by minimizing the
squared prediction error on the training set

$$
{\lbrace(\mathbf{x}_i, y_i)\rbrace}^{N}_{i = 1}
$$

Like this:

$$
\min_{\mathbf{w}, b}{\sum^{N}_{i = 1}{(y_i - f(x_i))^2}} = \min_{\mathbf{w}, b}{\sum^{N}_{i = 1}{(y_i - (\mathbf{w}^T \mathbf{x}_i + b))^2}}
$$

We have a **closed-form solution** for this. The bias $b$ can be absorbed into $\mathbf{w}$ by redefining:

$$
\mathbf{w} \leftarrow \begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{w}\\b\end{bmatrix}, \mathbf{x} \leftarrow \begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{x}\\1\end{bmatrix}
$$

then the minimization problem will be like this:

$$
\min_{\mathbf{w}} ||\mathbf{y} - \mathbf{X}^T \mathbf{w}||^2
$$

where $\mathbf{X} = [\mathbf{x_1}, \mathbf{x_2}, ..., \mathbf{x_N}]$ is the data matrix
and $\mathbf{y} = [y_1, y_2, ..., y_N]^T$ is the vector of outputs.

So we get the closed-form solution.

$$
\mathbf{w}^* = (\mathbf{X}\mathbf{X}^T)^{-1}\mathbf{X}\mathbf{y}
$$

The $(\mathbf{X}\mathbf{X}^T)^{-1}\mathbf{X}$ part is also called the pseudo-inverse of $\mathbf{X}$.

### Model Fit-R-Square

Commonly known as **R-Squared** ($R^2$), is a statistical measure that shows the proportion of the variance in the
dependent variable that can be explained by the independent variables in a regression model. It essentially indicates
how well the regression model fits the observed data.

For the prediction: $\hat{y_i} = f(x_i)$, R-Squared (Coefficient of Determination): proportion of variance is explained
by the model.

$$
R^2 = 1 - \frac{SSE}{SST}
$$

where the $SSE$ is the Sum of Squared Errors, calculated by

$$
SSE = \sum^{n}_{i = 1}(y_i - \hat{y_i})^2
$$

measuring the total squared difference between actual and predicted values; and the $SST$ is the Total Sum of
Squares, $SST = \sum^{n}_{i = 1}(y_i - \bar{y})^2$, measuring the total variance in the observed data, and $\bar{y}$ is
the mean.

Now we get $R^2$ can we can make an interpretation. $R^2$ closed to 1 means model explains most of the variance;
and $R^2$ closed to 0 means model explains little of the variance.

Then we have Adjusted R-Squared:

$$
\bar{R}^2 = 1 - (1 - R^2) \frac{n - 1}{n - p - 1}
$$

and it adjusts $R^2$ for the number of predictors $p$ and the sample size $n$. Thus, we can use Adjusted R-Squared when
comparing models with different numbers of features. Also, Adjusted R-Squared penalizes unnecessary predictors.

## つづく...
